test/README.md, before:

# End to end tests

This directory contains the category of tests which we like to call "end to end". Primarily they consist of tests which first start a private network and then run a series of commands against that network.

These tests have grown since the project started and we have a number of different frameworks. There are a number of different tests, frameworks and tools in this directory.


# Directories
## Tests / Test Frameworks

* scripts - shell scripted integration test framework.
* e2e-go - tests that can be run with the `go test`.
* framework - functions and utilities used by the e2e-go tests.
* release-testing - a spot for specific release tests, see README files in subdirectories.
* muleCI - scripts run tests on a Jenkins server with mule
* packages - test that algod can be packaged on different docker environments.
* platform - test the algod amd64 package compatibility across different distributions.

## Tools / Data
* commandandcontrol - a remote control tool for algod. It allows you to manage many instances across many nodes.
* netperf-go - tools for semi-automated performance tests.
* testdata - datasets used by other tools not included in this repository.

# Scripts

Entry point to our integration test framework, including the e2e-go tests.

Must run from the root project directory, `./test/scripts/e2e.sh`

## scripts/e2e_client_runner.py and scripts/e2e_subs/

These tests are shell scripts which all run in series against a single private network.

Each script is provided with a wallet which contains a large supply of algos to use during the test.
```
usage: e2e_client_runner.py [-h] [--keep-temps] [--timeout TIMEOUT] [--verbose] [--version Future|vXX] [scripts [scripts ...]]

positional arguments:
  scripts            scripts to run

optional arguments:
  -h, --help             show this help message and exit
  --keep-temps           if set, keep all the test files
  --timeout TIMEOUT      integer seconds to wait for the scripts to run
  --verbose
  --version Future|vXX   selects the network template file
```

To run a specific test:
```
~$ ./e2e_client_runner.py full/path/to/test_script.sh
```

Commit message:

Add a section for scripts that are more efficient when running serially.

test/README.md, after:

# End to end tests

This directory contains the category of tests which we like to call "end to end". Primarily they consist of tests which first start a private network and then run a series of commands against that network.

These tests have grown since the project started and we have a number of different frameworks. There are a number of different tests, frameworks and tools in this directory.


# Directories
## Tests / Test Frameworks

* scripts - shell scripted integration test framework.
* e2e-go - tests that can be run with the `go test`.
* framework - functions and utilities used by the e2e-go tests.
* release-testing - a spot for specific release tests, see README files in subdirectories.
* muleCI - scripts run tests on a Jenkins server with mule
* packages - test that algod can be packaged on different docker environments.
* platform - test the algod amd64 package compatibility across different distributions.

## Tools / Data
* commandandcontrol - a remote control tool for algod. It allows you to manage many instances across many nodes.
* netperf-go - tools for semi-automated performance tests.
* testdata - datasets used by other tools not included in this repository.

# Scripts

Entry point to our integration test framework, including the e2e-go tests.

Must run from the root project directory, `./test/scripts/e2e.sh`

## scripts/e2e_client_runner.py and scripts/e2e_subs/

These tests are shell scripts which all run in parallel against a single private network.

Each script is provided with a wallet which contains a large supply of algos to use during the test.
```
usage: e2e_client_runner.py [-h] [--keep-temps] [--timeout TIMEOUT] [--verbose] [--version Future|vXX] [scripts [scripts ...]]

positional arguments:
  scripts            scripts to run

optional arguments:
  -h, --help             show this help message and exit
  --keep-temps           if set, keep all the test files
  --timeout TIMEOUT      integer seconds to wait for the scripts to run
  --verbose
  --version Future|vXX   selects the network template file
```

To run a specific test:
```
~$ ./e2e_client_runner.py /full/path/to/e2e_subs/test_script.sh
```

Tests in the `e2e_subs/serial` directory are executed serially instead of in parallel. This should only be used when absolutely necessary.
